# There is an aging program with a large genetic component.

### Heritability of Lifespan

The queen ant lives for many years, while worker ants, despite having the same genome, survive only a single season. Thus, aging involves more than just genetic factors. Regardless of whether the gene is the only unit of heritability that is relevent to aging, it is clear that aging is heritable. Maximum and average lifespan are stabally transmitted from one generation to the next. The "program" of aging may be embedded in non-genetic components, such as information stored in cellular structures like centrioles (Marshall, 2009). 

Maximum lifespan remains constant when organimss are removed from the wild and kept in laboratory conditions, indicating that maximum lifespan is due to internal factors. Maximum lifespan is different for organisms in the same ecological niche, meaning that maximum lifespan has to due to internal factors and no the niche. 

Maximum lifespan is not measured in chronological time. For example, if yeast cells are put in low temperatures, they divide slower and their replicatie and actual lifespan is increased. The lifespan of many organisms is markedly affetced by temperature. 

### Genetic Basis of Lifespan 

An organism’s lifespan has a strong genetic component, as evidenced by the following four observations: 

1. **There are often large species-specific differences in lifespan.**

2. **Different genotypes of the same species often have different average lifespans. The most striking example of this in many species is the sex difference in lifespan.**
 
3. **There are often family patterns of lifespan in heterogeneous populations.**

4. **Aging genes —genes that, when knocked out, extend lifespan—have been found in every species in which they have been sought.**

Firstly, there are differences in lifespan between biologically similar species. For example, the Pacific Ocean rockfish Sebastes minor has an avergae lifespan of 11 years, while the Pacific rockish Sebastes aleutianus has an average lifespan of more than 200 years [Kolora, S. R. et al., 2021] [Love, M. S. et al., 2002]. Another example is the Myotis brandtii bat can live well over thirty years [Seim, I. e tal, 2013], while the Molossus molossus bat has a lifespan of less than 10 years [Gager, Y. et al., 2016]. In such examples, it is likely that small genetic differences are the cause of these large differences in average lifespan. However, it could be that non-genetic factors, such as slight differences in ecological niches, contribute to these lifespan disparities. To address this, we turn to additional lines of evidence.

Within a species, one of the most profound distinguishing characteristics between organisms is sex. Sex is genetically determined, and there is a consistent difference in average lifespan between sexes, even when accounting for external factors like predation or accidental deaths [Feraldi, A. et al., 2022]. 

Furthermore, in heterogeneous populations, such as the United States, genetic influences on lifespan are evident from family patterns of lifespan. Monozygotic twins, who share nearly identical genetic material, have more similar life spans than those of dizygotic twins, who have less similar genetic material. Likewise, in heterogeneous populations, siblings have more similar lifespans than more distant relatives or unrelated individuals. Familial patterns of lifespan are less pronounced in more homogeneous populations, such as Sweden, since individuals in homogenous populations already share a large amount of genetic material. Hence, the genetic disparity between siblings and more distant relatives is smaller. Together, these three observations provide robust evidence that genetics play a critical role in shaping life span. 

Furthermore, aging genes are evolutionarily conserved. Why then has evolution not selected for greater longevity?

There is a difference in average lifespan between men and women. However, there is no difference in maximum lifespan between men and women. There have been improvements in average lifespan that can be attributed to public health, medicine and accident prevention. However, there has been no improvement in maximum lifespan. The cause of death changes dramatically, but maximum lifespan stays the same. When infectious disease is removed as a cause of death, cancer and cardiovascular disease take its place to ensure huamns still die right on time. 

A common criticism of the programmed theory of aging is the absence of long-lived mutants. If aging is truly programmed, we might expect to see humans with mutations in their biological clocks, allowing them to live dramatically longer—perhaps even more than 500 years. The reason there are no long-lived mutants is that the aging program is highly robust to spontaneous mutations. The aging program has developed ways to deal with the spontaneous mutations that arise in nature, just as the developmental program has developed ways to deal with the insult of the embryo being divided into two. To truly reverse aging, a more targeted and coordinated insult to the body is needed. Evolution, while robust, is not invincible. There are specific challenges to the genome and the body that evolution cannot handle. A coordinated and targeted insult to the body’s biological clocks is the most promising aging intervention. We need interventions that break things down and target the clock, not interventions that clear damage.
The lack of ‘immortal’ mutants in nature is indeed very significant, and is one of the strongest arguments for programmed aging. To understand this, it is important to differentiate between arbitrarily rare events and meaningfully rare events. Consider the example of a basketball player from Indiana making a shot from a particular point on a particular court while wearing green shorts. It is certainly true that a rare event has occurred. However, this is not a meaningfully rare event. This event is rare only due to arbitrary considerations like the color of the players' shorts. If the player were wearing blue shorts instead of green shorts, it is not clear the event would be more rare. For every meaningful rare event, there is always a clear way in which the event could have been more rare.
In contrast, imagine flipping 100 coins and having all of them land on heads. This is a meaningfully rare event because there is a clear way to make it even rarer: flipping 101 coins and having all of them land on heads as well. Meaningfully rare events do happen, and their occurrence or nonoccurrence can offer valuable insights. Over enough trials, we expect meaningfully rare events to happen, no matter how improbable they seem. For instance, if you conduct the coin-flipping experiment repeatedly, you would expect all 100 coins to land on heads eventually. However, if after an extraordinary number of trials such an outcome never occurs, we would increasingly question the assumption that the coins are independent and fair. Instead, it would be likely that there was some mechanism preventing this rare outcome—something that keeps track of the coin flips and interferes to ensure that not all coins land on heads. 
If organisms die as a result of the aging program allowing damage to accumulate, we would expect some organisms to live much longer than others simply by chance. If aging were merely the result of random damage building up over time, and populations were large enough, then we would expect some individuals to avoid damage long enough to live vastly beyond their expected lifespan. Yet, this is not what we observe in nature. There is strong evidence that organisms have a biologically programmed maximum lifespan. Aging interventions generally extend median lifespan without extending maximum lifespan. Aging interventions generally result in ‘squared’ survival curves, where organisms spend more of their life healthy, but all the organisms still die around the same upper limit. Like the coins that seem to be ‘watched’ by some external force to ensure they don’t all land on heads, the aging process appears to be regulated in such a way that no individual escapes the built-in limits of their biological lifespan. 
The concept of a biologically programmed maximum lifespan suggests that organisms may possess a death program separate from their aging program. The aging program, governed by biological clocks, allows damage to accumulate gradually, reducing an organism’s fitness and transitioning the organisms into a more vulnerable grandfatherly role. Over time, this damage makes survival less likely, but it does not directly cause death. Instead, the existence of a maximum lifespan suggests the presence of a death program—a programmed mechanism, also governed by biological clocks, that ensures an organism dies at a certain point, regardless of accumulated damage. This death program may work similarly to the well-known death programs observed in species like bamboo plants, octopuses, and cicadas, where organisms die all at once after reproduction.

# References 

Kolora, S. R. R., Owens, G. L., Vazquez, J. M., Stubbs, A., Chatla, K., Jainese, C., ... & Sudmant, P. H. (2021). Origins and evolution of extreme life span in Pacific Ocean rockfishes. Science, 374(6569), 842-847.

Love, M. S., Yoklavich, M., & Thorsteinson, L. K. (2002). The rockfishes of the northeast Pacific. Univ of California Press.

Seim, I., Fang, X., Xiong, Z., Lobanov, A. V., Huang, Z., Ma, S., ... & Gladyshev, V. N. (2013). Genome analysis reveals insights into physiology and longevity of the Brandt’s bat Myotis brandtii. Nature communications, 4(1), 2212.

Gager, Y., Gimenez, O., O’Mara, M. T., & Dechmann, D. K. (2016). Group size, survival and surprisingly short lifespan in socially foraging bats. BMC ecology, 16(1), 1-12.

Feraldi, A., & Zarulli, V. (2022). Patterns in age and cause of death contribution to the sex gap in life expectancy: A comparison among ten countries. Genus, 78(1), 23.
